It's big. I
know.
Does he?
Build up.
Why are you giving that to me about Predator Free? That wasn't cool.
You're talking too much to Willie about being competitive.
Don't try and be friends with us.
Should have turned up with Willie. Willie and possum food.
We don't want to be your friend.
I only speak the truth.
Not for this stuff. Come on.
Oh, man.
It's not true.
Sorry, Dave. We should get-
That's a wrap party.
All right. I'll meet you all.
Everything is quiet.
Oh, good. How are you?
Louis.
Tena koutou katoa. Nga mihi haramai ki tenei huihuinga.
Thank you very much, Minister Pōtaka,
for your attendance today, and also Dave and your
staff, Heketa as well. And this afternoon,
we had some time with you with regards to Whānau
Ora. Obviously tomorrow, there's another session itself, but this one is
clearly focused on Whānau Ora.
And although the opposition would like to give you 30 minutes with your opening
commentary, we'll only give you a few minutes to be able to make some brief
comments to begin with, Minister Pōtaka.
And we will start that now, so welcome.
Tena tatou e huruhuru nei, e tuitui nei i te kaupapa karanga.
Te arohaehae, te arotake hoki i nga mahi,
e kiia nei ko Whānau Ora. Engari
ko ta te kaupapa matua ko te
whakaputea hoki i tenei kaupapa, te oranga o te
whānau. Kei ia te iwi, kei ia te hapū, kei ia te whānau tona ake
oranga. Engari tenei kaupapa,
tenei ministatanga e whakahaerehia ana e
Dave, te toi hou me te Heketa Tari mo te kaupapa
Whakawhanake Māori. Mihi ana ki a Dave i tona
tu hei
tumu kaimahi mo te Pone Kōkiri i enei tau e ono,
e whitu kataha nei. Ākonai ka oti ona mahi,
ka pumau tonutia tana haravai. Mihi ana ki a koe,
Dave. Tae atu ki a Paula,
tana awhi e tautoko ana i enei mahi.
Ko nga mihi o te ngakau iti rawa ki a Whatarangi mā, Henry mā-
Kia ora
... Rowena mā,
Tiff Belma,
me Tatamati mā. Katoa ratou nga totara haemata o te wā o
Nui Atane tae atu ki enei ahua ano.
Me te mea nei,
e kiana te korero, me tu kahikatea, kua mate kahikatea hoki.
Tenei ahau tangi pana ki a tatou katoa.
Tena tatou
me nga awhi tihana o te wa.
I just want to acknowledge the very many various many leaders that have passed on
recently. Of course, Uncle Whatarangi,
last week, and actually last night, my father's brother passed away.
So just letting you know as a heads-up-
Kia ora
... that he was a great moa of the urupā. He was the number one sexton.
I'm the deputy sexton of our whānau urupā. He was the head sexton.
And so I'll be heading that way to Rata, Thriving Metropolis,
later this week.
Kia ora.
Now, the Whānau Ora portfolio, I just want a bit of context for a minute or
two. The government invests and spends around $70, maybe more,
billion a year across the social sector.
About half of that is spent on 85% of the population, and the remaining half on
15% of the population. And of that,
oh, sorry, the remaining half of the money on 15% population, and of
that 15%, we characterize about half of that 15%
are Māori.
And these whānau are often harder to reach.
And as a result,
from a fiscal perspective, we do spend
some pūtea trying to reach these whānau, who often have low trust in
the public service.
But importantly, Whānau Ora is a flagship
example of whānau-centered, locally led, and government-enabled approaches,
using commissioning agencies and the
provider network in order to help deliver and facilitate
the better delivery of, I'll call it kāwanatanga services across
whānau.
And recently, we announced the budget, and basically, the
baseline of the Whānau Ora funding has been preserved, which is
circa $180 million.
And we have strengthened the existing foundations of Whānau
Ora through a recent procurement process that closed out
30 June, 1 July last year, with the
award of commissioning agency arrangements to four new
commission agencies, one being Tangi Taumiel,
a collaboration of iwi, Māori partnership boards, and others in
Northland, Tāmaki Makaurau, Whakatō,
Mahutonga, which is Ngāti Toa, Rangatira led throughout the rest
of the North Island,
Te Tairawhiti in the South Island to WaiPounamu and beyond.
Whare Kauri, Rīkohu, and the Tatutatu
Collective under the leadership of Rachel Nosa, and Aiono
being a Pasifika community commissioning agency.
And we went through that procurement process, and there may be some questions about
that in order to enable
some shifts across the delivery.
Not necessarily the practice of Whānau Ora, but the delivery of Whānau Ora to
ensure that,
A, we have better service reach across the country, B, a strengthened evidence
base, and we have done things and contracted arrangements to ensure that happens
and I think with a strengthened evidence base, we're going to get better
credibility, but also more powerful influence and advocacy
across multiple ministerial portfolios to get more support
and ultimately putia running through the commissioning arrangements.
Data-driven investment planning,
which includes investment boards that each of the commissioning agencies have.
Improved frontline workforce development and retention, and a strengthened risk
management process. Whānau Ora is one of the five key
strategic objectives of Te Kāhui Kokiri, alongside the culture and language,
monitoring and mentoring, Māori economic developments, and iwi Māori and Crown
relations.
We have seen a huge movement as a result of these
shifts
around the Whānau Ora
evidence,
and now we've got 8,000 whānau who have enrolled with Whānau Ora services since
1 July.
I think
maybe I'll just stop there. But last thing I'd say is this, is that we believe,
and I believe that Whānau Ora
is a successful public service commissioning model,
and it's Whānau Ora 2.0 is a
kaupapa that can be adopted
across the public service, and
it's with
good spirit that we have got Oranga Tamariki now starting to use the Whānau Ora
commissioning model as a pathway to help facilitate
and deliver the services that come from Oranga Tamariki.
My
hope is that we will see the public
sector adopting the Whānau Ora commissioning model more, having more effective
associations with social investment and the evidence base that's required through
the social investment kaupapa. But ultimately,
we are able to enable more
putia and support for the Whānau Ora
2.0 group. Kia ora.
Kia ora, Minister. We'll move straight to Shanan. Next question.
Thank you, Minister. Our whānau are in some of the most dire
circumstances that we've seen in over a decade, whether we're looking at
unemployment, housing,
young people not being engaged in educational training, access to health services.
And it appears to me that there is less funding going into
Whānau Ora, despite the increase of demand that you're talking
about. The services have told me directly that they are
having more young people turning up on their door, more whānau presenting
as a result.
Mm.
So when it comes to shift one, greater service reach, how are you
expecting to achieve that with less
money, and somewhat less service
provision?
Well, I don't necessarily agree with the less money allegation.
We've preserved the baseline for the most part at about $180 million.
So I don't know where that comment comes from.
But in terms of the dire situation of some of the confronting
circumstances that our whānau and our people have, absolutely agree.
Whether or not that's as a result of
some of the pretty confronting poverty that many of our whānau
face in cost of living and economic situation, or sometimes as a
result of environmental climate and other weather events that confronts people
like those out in Aotearoa who I know others are from,
or some of the pretty difficult and
challenging housing circumstances that our people have had.
As an example, I often use the example in Hamilton West, when you turn up
into politics and there's 760 kids living in the hotels in
Hamilton. Those are dire circumstances.
But we've taken pretty solid steps to make sure that the
use of public monies
is very, very
credible and evidenced and efficient.
That's why we've been really deliberate in making sure that first and foremost,
we are going out to assess the reach of Whānau Ora,
and making sure that there is a deliberate allocation of putia based on
the social deprivation index. And it's not as
flexible, might be a nice way to describe it,
but it was
less focused on the deprivation index in the previous allocation,
1.0. I'm not saying 1.0 was unsuccessful.
What I'm saying is we're to build on 1.0, and that's why I went through a
procurement process and focus on where the most
deprivation is. That's why you saw a shift in the putia
into Region One, which is the region that only
Tangata was not a commissioning agency for.
So in terms of targeting and focusing the limited resource that
we have allocated to Whānau Ora into areas of deprivation, we've
done that. In terms of the suggestion that Whānau Ora
funding's been cut, I don't agree with that.
I think that the baseline, for the most part, has been
preserved. And in terms of the broader picture, where there
is serious deprivation, absolutely.
But at the current moment,
the allocation to Whānau Ora and the budget for Whānau Ora is around about
$180 million. It went up over time, started about 30 million
way back when, 15 years ago. It's gone up over
time, and I'd like to see,
with a successful evidence base and credible delivery of
Whānau Ora provision, that that number increases over time.
Supplementary, Shanan.
Thank you. And so except you don't agree with the reduction,
even though it's quite clear.
What you do say is that you are going to achieve greater service reach
across the rohe, which is really important, and the demand is there.
What's your analysis of what that cost is to increase that service reach,
and whereabouts will it go to?
I don't know if there's--
I'll ask David, if Dave might want to pass on some views in that regard as
well. But first of all, let's start with where we started from
around making sure
that we really focus on populations in need and using a
very credible- A data set, which is a social deprivation index
in order to make that allocation, rather than saying, "Actually,
here's some pūtea, bulk funded, off you go." Which is sort
of the way it was
allocated beforehand. Now we're saying we'll actually just step back a little bit
and say, "What areas are we really talking about?" And then
enable and empower the commission agencies to make the calls over,
let's say, the number of funded navigators in a certain location based
on data.
Which are less, though.
No. It's-
Less navigators overall.
No, there's more navigators now than there ever were in Whanau Ora.
There's over 700 navigators now, whereas before was less than 600.
So I don't know where you're getting your data feeds from, but
that is the fact.
It's from your department.
There are more
navigators now
than there were under Whanau Ora 1.0.
And part of the shift that we've undertaken is to make sure that we have
improved our frontline workforce development and retention,
and there are a number of things that we've seen commission agencies and providers
do in order to ensure that not only are there more
navigators in place,
but also they're allocated to places where
there are higher numbers of deprivation.
So if-
Are you guys chairing?
Thank you.
You're on a roll.
So if,
effectively you're saying that you've made savings from the shift from bulk funding
to a more targeted approach, cater five. There's savings there.
What are those savings that you're making as a result, and how will they
be used to achieve the greater service reach?
No, I don't think that it's fair to say that I said savings.
What I've said is that the procurement process has been
far more directed and targeted towards deprivation index.
The amount of money that's going through Whanau Ora has been around about the same
for a couple of years, which is around $180 million.
So if you're saying you've saved or you've cut, that's not something
that I subscribe to, and it's not what I think the budget
actually bears out. What we've done is made sure that we get
increased workforce numbers. That's why there's more navigators now than there were
two years ago, and that we focus more on where the
need is at. Now, we have some materials, of course, from the early uploading
on the IDI, which is required from navigators every, is it three months?
Four months.
Every four months,
the providers and commissioning agencies have to make sure they upload
the relevant detail around individual whanau,
de-identified onto the IDI. And what we've learnt
from the early information uploads,
is that there's a massive
needs base within the cohort that Whanau Ora is engaged with.
That is like night and day. So whether or not the Whanau Ora
navigators are engaging with people that are on the benefit or
on a benefit or
have disability or have severe housing problems, the data is starting to
show that Whanau Ora is right in that need space.
Whereas before it was a bit harder to actually understand that and calculate, it
was more anecdotal. Now we've got far more defensible and
credible evidence. That, in my view, helps with the advocacy that
we've got, which is public sector should adopt Whanau Ora as a commissioning,
well, outside of TPK, but across different portfolios. Dave?
Yeah.
If I just, Mr. Chair, if I just step back and step up.
Now, the minister has talked about $70 billion in social sector
spending every year. Now, that's everything.
That's benefits,
universal benefits.
Way more.
That's everything in the social sector.
But if we talk about commissioning,
$8 billion a year goes out in commissioning, and the
metrics that the minister talked about, around half of that goes to
15% of the population, and the other half of that goes to
the rest of the population, 85% of the population.
For Whanau Ora, our spend at the moment is only 0.2% of
that.
Mm.
Mm-hmm.
So the minister has managed to keep the funding
for Whanau Ora.
That's the first point I'd want to make.
The second point around reach and evidence.
Reaching who?
Who is being reached? The working well,
or is it the hard to reach and those in need?
And that is the 15%. And approximately we're, and this is
only a guess, we reckon half of that would be Maori.
Mm.
They are in need. And there's a number of reasons why they're in need.
First of all is because trust and confidence in the public
service by our community is not high.
Kiwi's count reflects that. It is lower than the general population,
and the public service cannot reach those people.
There has to be others who can reach them.
And the whole Whanau Ora kaupapa, whanau centered, locally led,
government enabled, allows the community to reach into the
community. So it's important that we have the right people doing that.
The third point is around evidence and data.
We don't have evidence across that $8 billion, across the whole
of the public service, that proves attribution.
Mm.
We can't prove that it works across the whole public service.
Not talking about Whanau Ora, I'm talking about everything we do.
And Minister Willis has been really clear in that, and that is the basis
for social investment. So it's evidence and data,
and if it's okay, I will ask Grace to come forward and talk to this.
Grace, come.
It is about evidence and data and being able to match the
data across health, across justice,
across education,
across employment.
Because these are the people, there is a
commonality in terms of high needs.
Mm.
In terms of being able to reach them, we couldn't follow the money in the
previous Whanau Ora-
This time, what we've got is
$150,000 per navigator.
Mm.
$125,000 of that goes out to the front line.
So it's about the people that are actually connecting with those whanau.
Only $25,000 of that stays
back for administration. That's where it's better use of the
money. That's where that comes from.
Can I step on then?
Can step in.
Was yours a sup? I'll step on it.
I am a sup and now a primary.
Okay.
Just a sup, because you've got some other sups.
Before I finish, can I just hand over to Grace to just
embellish some of that on the data and the evidence, and how the
matching data can be used here.
Yeah. Can I just clarify what my question was there, because it wasn't questioning
the data or the service. It was asking, essentially, how are
we funding the greater service reach,
given the funding is the same or lower?
Well, there was no allocation-
There was no allocation
... for navigators in the past. It was just bulk funded.
Mm.
So where was that going?
You tell us where it was going, Dave. You can't just look there.
Well, I know where it is now.
Mm.
It's going 125,000K-
Yeah, so why-
... is going into a navigator
... are you saying we couldn't follow the money in terms of the last provider?
What are you saying?
Because we didn't have a model for navigators.
We didn't have a model where we could reach. Now we do.
And now we're 12 months on, Minister.
Mm.
Because I don't want to go over the history lesson-
Yeah
... because I think that there's a good opportunity to really understand
how the money is tracking and the effectiveness of service.
As you have just reported, Matua Dave, around the spend and how
much of a small percentage there is to the back office.
Mm.
With the increased requirements around data
collection, around analysis, IDI integration,
I celebrate if there's more workforce on the front line,
but with the additional compliance of the government to be able to
track, should we not be increasing resource in the
analysis and the reporting and the tracking of spend in order to
tell the story better? Because $25,000 being kept for
admin purposes doesn't seem necessarily fair for the
additional load that these new providers are being weighted with right
now.
I think that's a fair sort of observation, but maybe we'll invite Grace
to make a couple of comments about that-
Yeah
... and these other matters Dave alluded to.
Thank you, Minister. So just on that point, we have been working very
closely with all four commissioning agencies to stand them up for 1 July
last year.
Yeah.
And since that time, working very closely with them as well around their
capability, around their systems,
around their back office functions.
One of the learnings out of Whanau Ora 1.0 was that we wanted to make
sure that money does go to the front line, and that we didn't want
commissioning agencies building large surpluses.
With all the needs that whanau have, the idea of a surplus is a
bit of an anathema, really.
Mm.
And so this really is about having a transparent model that everyone can see,
everyone can understand, and the 25K is per navigator.
So if you think about Rangitai Middle, they've got 301
FTE. So they've got 301 times 25K
to manage that back office function.
And for all of our commissioning agencies, we've been working with them closely as
to how that back office function can be best supported and create some
efficiencies across the four of them so that they're not creating four separate
systems.
Mm.
The investment into the IDI and the investment into the data capture
is already paying dividends. So we know that in that
first period from July to October last year, that was the first tranche of
data that went into the IDI in January, and we got the results of that in
April. That initial data set shows us what we've never been
able to see before, and that's
data going into the spine and then being matched and correlated with data out
of Justice, out of Health, out of Education, and also out of
MSD. And that shows us, for example, that a
person engaging with Whanau Ora is 11 times more likely to be the primary applicant
for social housing.
Mm.
They're four times more likely to have a benefit as their main source of income.
They're four times more likely to be a NEET, not in any education, employment,
in the ages of 15 to 24, and they're two and a half times more likely to have a
truancy issue at school.
Mm.
Now, the previous Whanau Ora data didn't give us that level of analysis, and
it didn't give us that level of integrity of data, because that's not Te Puni
Kōkiri assessing that.
That's not commissioning agencies assessing that.
That's going into the spine of the IDI, and that coming out of Stats New Zealand.
So this is a massive point that Grace is making, is that basically before,
any data that was being uploaded into the IDI, you couldn't use
it in a manner to really track
the characteristics or the
improvements in health or whanau wellbeing across whanau
that were registered with Whanau Ora.
Mm.
That was a massive issue. So we didn't really have a sense
of multi-agency engagement across that at a credentialized
evidence level. Now we can do that, we're actually in a far more,
let's call it building, evolving position where we think,
those that have this intersection with the portfolio, we're going to have a far
more credible and powerful argument to say to the Minister of Finance
or anyone else, "Actually, this is what we're finding out through this
public sector commissioning model.
It's credible evidence, and we think we can work more on it, more
pūtea, or resources, or regulatory relief."
And just to follow along that, because you provide
an overview that there's been a growth and an extension of service
provision, and can you tell us a bit more about the providers who have come
on board? Because in this extension and focus on grassroots
delivery and front line, are there more providers coming into the Whanau
Ora sector?
Well, a number of the providers that were existing have been re-engaged to help
deliver on the navigation services, but there's also been a number of other
providers who were effectively locked out of the Whanau Ora provision
that have now been engaged, sometimes in places that are way out in the boons-
In order to get better reach or service reach as described.
So it's pleasing to see that the commissioning agencies have been very
deliberate in engaging those that are doing really well, but also looking at other
options.
And so just following on from that, when you're in the boon--
like the Wild, Wild West in the back blocks-
Yeah, Northland
... of the Kainga, Northland, Bay of Plenty, wherever it might be.
How do we get the
data and feedback into the mothership of each of these
collectives, Whanau Ora commissioning agencies, to really story
tell on time,
uh, in real life for you as funders to be able to see the impact?
And I only raise that thinking about storm response.
Mm.
And if you can give us like a bit of a narrative as to the
way that Whanau Ora contributed or didn't in the way that
communities were impacted in these recent storm events over the last few months.
So, uh, are you seeing the data coming through whereby
Whanau Ora is providing support and impact in those types of
communities?
Yeah. So, maybe just to
outline some of the different ways in which data comes in.
So we've talked a lot about the IDI, and the IDI is, um,
comes from the 169 providers into the commissioning agencies and
then goes straight to stats. So Te Puni Kōkiri doesn't touch that data.
We then have a different data set, which is what we call our service performance
data, and that's data that comes into Te Puni Kōkiri, and that's around
navigator numbers and so on. Um, and it also tells us more of a story
about the performance of the entities as opposed to the-
... We have a third set of data, which is our progression framework, which
is where Whanau self-identify how they are tracking with their
goals.
Mm.
Because let's not forget that Whanau Ora is really about putting Whanau in the
driving seat, about what's important to them,
about putting them in charge of their priorities and their plan.
And so there are different, um, reporting
mechanisms which are in play, which are together
used to tell the Whanau story. They've all got strengths
and some weaknesses as well. But collectively, the, the three
main data channels enable us to give a more fulsome picture
of Whanau Ora. That, that story is still emerging, so we've only got one
set of data around the IDI so far. We get the service performance data
on a more regular basis. But the checking back with the Whanau in terms of the,
uh, progression, um, approach as well, again, these, um,
challenges that Whanau have will take time to address.
So we're not looking at Whanau Ora being a service intervention that's,
you know, like a, a vaccination, and you're done.
This is about a long-term plan with Whanau to prioritize their needs.
And so, um, just thinking about that long-term connection with
Whanau, uh, what is the Whanau voice coming through in terms of the
impact of the coalition government's policies,
funding cuts across services? What are Whanau sharing back to
Whanau Ora in terms of the realities of what they're facing?
We're not, um...
So the Whanau Ora model is based on the seven outcomes, and
the seven outcomes have been set in time, um, as the sort of
priority focus areas for Whanau to work out what their plan is.
That's not a, um, a narrative that's coming through in those seven
outcomes that we are receiving.
And yet we know Whanau who are accessing the services are
seeing cuts, whether it's in benefits, in lack of access to
services. Um, are you not receiving
feedback that Whanau aren't being impacted?
No, the feedback we're receiving is that Whanau are
keen to engage with navigators to help them to work out how
to address the challenges that they see within their Whanau.
Mm.
So we know that Whanau Ora has a brand amongst our
communities which is trusted, and that, uh, our Whanau Ora
navigators are embedded in their communities, and Whanau are actively reaching
out to Whanau Ora navigators to help them develop a plan for their Whanau.
Yeah. Because there's significant cost of living impacts that these Whanau might
face.
Okay. We're short of time, Mihaere.
We've got to start, because you, you've used a lot of the time.
I'll give some others an opportunity. So over to you, Shannon.
So, um, so accept the data, that's really important.
And to the minister's point, he said we use that to go to the Minister Putea
to seek more resources, for example.
But in this instance, in this budget, that hasn't happened.
Um, and can I just ask the question-
Data
... does that data capture, um,
acquire the demand that is out there that the service
needs to meet?
Well, I think it's early days-
And what is the-
... in terms of the data drop that might, uh, give us sufficient, um,
uh, evidence and credible data to have a more meaningful conversation,
uh, with the Minister of Finance or anyone else across the
ministerial, uh, colleague set. Uh, what's important is that
we have essentially initiated a system that's far more credible and
defensible than Whanau Ora 1.0, and we've described that in a variety of
ways here. Uh, and over time, I'm talking
years, not, um, days or months, we expect that that will provide a
more, um, persuasive basis to show that Whanau Ora
be, uh, adopted as a public sector commissioning model, not just Te Puni
Kōkiri. Uh, now, there are different views as to how that might
be situated across minister, minist- uh, ministries and departments.
Uh, but for the most time, we're trying to make Whanau Ora 2.0 a better
version of Whanau Ora 1.0, and one that is fit for purpose and
also aligned and intersecting with social investment, which is where the Minister
of Finance has been very deliberate around the allocation of, um, uh,
social, uh,
a- a- a- around the allocation of Putea in this space and in the commissioning
space. So we're building into, um-
What the Minister of Finance and Minister of Social Investment has spied
delivery of public services and the use of public monies to be.
It's early days, but even in early days, we can see that it's
actually performing better from an evidence basis and a data basis than what it
was.
That's right, Minister. And just on that point,
we've always heard the anecdotes of the five cars up the driveway.
What the data, and it's just the first set of data, and this is from July to
October. What the first set of data shows us is that there is a strong
correlation across health, education, MSD, and justice.
So rather than have those four cars up the driveway, what this is now showing us
is that whanau are saying the one car we do want up the driveway is the navigator,
and the navigator is the one person that we want to work with when we are dealing
with all these issues. So to the Minister's point regarding a better
public service model,
the mechanism of Whanau Ora is a
channel that whanau themselves are choosing and prioritizing to deal with their
issues. And so therefore it does create a strong case, albeit of one
four-month data set that will grow every four-month
period.
Thank you. And so on your books now,
how many whanau are sitting there waiting to access the service?
Well, there are 8,000 whanau that are on the books right now.
It's been building up over the last nine months.
We expect it'll be a lot more in the next data set.
But you don't know that now?
Well, we can't predict how many exactly, how many whanau are going to come on
board to Whanau Ora, but what we envisage is that will increase over time.
And we know from previous years, that a whole bunch of whanau do
intersect with Whanau Ora. These are actually registered with Whanau Ora and-
Is there a wait list though,
that you're aware of? Does your data capture
a wait list of whanau who have presented to Whanau Ora agencies-
I'll just ask Cindy that one
... and providers?
Is there a shortfall?
Well...
And it goes back to my original point, which is our whanau find themselves in the
most difficult circumstances currently.
There's not a budget increase anywhere, which we're saying is we're doing
better with the funds than we have.
Yeah.
But I can't walk away asking the question of are there more whanau out there
waiting to access the service that you're not currently
delivering, Minister?
There is a, from what I'm advised, there is a wait list of
whanau that will-
How many?
... be engaged.
Not sure. So we,
the whanau that are engaged, and that data is going into the IDI.
As I said, we've got three different data set points, the IDI data, the
service performance data, and then also the progression data.
What we do know is that Whanau Ora is not a service that people are referred
to. It is something that is whanau initiated.
And we know in working closely with the commissioning agencies, but not the service
providers, that the commissioning agencies let us know where there
might be system pressures.
But what I would say is this, in response to the question, you should get out and
encourage people to register and engage with Whanau Ora,
and make sure that those, particularly those in need
do engage with Whanau Ora because that provision is nearly everywhere around the
country or is accessible to most people around the country.
As you know, I have been out to providers.
They're the ones telling me that they have a wait list, and that's why I'm asking
you today, Minister, what is the number of whanau waiting to
access your service that are on those wait lists?
We don't have a specific number to tell you today.
But what we can say is that there are whanau in need, and our expectation is the
Whanau Ora providers and their navigators will get out, especially given there are
more navigators now than there were in 2023.
Can I do a follow up on that one?
Sure.
On the point of navigators, because I've been waiting.
On the point of navigators, hi Minister and the team.
So how are we assisting or how are you assisting navigators with
their workforce and career development to ensure
it's a sustainable approach?
Well, we do have, oh someone else is going to come up.
Some work that's been done around regional workforce profiles, and that involves a
couple of things.
Sorry, I can't hear. Sorry, Steve. Missed that.
We do have workforce development profiles, which is, I wouldn't call
a new initiative, but it's something new that didn't exist in Whanau Ora 1.0,
and that has some pretty deliberate training and capability framework that
goes around
what it takes to be an effective navigator.
Now, those dynamics or that framework and that training platform didn't
exist under 1.0, just didn't. But as a result of the
leadership of the team that surrounds me and of course,
our
intention to make it more successful than what it was.
We do have that in order now. Now, if there was
one, and there was a development framework previously under
1.0-
Oh
... the commissioning agencies weren't forthcoming for that.
They're in some ways very closed shop around information
such as workforce developments and information such as service reach.
But that's the nature of the way people operated in the past.
Things have changed. We're going better.
Was yours a supplementary or a new question?
Supplementary.
Okay.
Just on the workforce and what Shannon spoke to.
So, whanau, while they might present for
Whanau Ora services, our services are also more
connected now more than ever. And hearing from
providers who value the Whanau Ora
service provision are referring actively
and contributing, I think, to a real wait list that
exists in community. So I think that there's a really
important opportunity here to examine what that wait list looks like and
where the whanau are coming from because our workers are all connected
now more than ever because of what's happening in community.
And then you have whanau that might have to wait for some time because the Whanau
Ora navigators are the ones who know the system
So I'm inviting that maybe we could look to provide some additional
questions in order to unpack what that wait list might look like.
Well, it's interesting you say that, because that wait list does get probably a bit
longer when people are successful in providing the Whānau Ora navigation services.
And, my expectation and certainly what I'm
observing is that Whānau Ora navigators are working very
effectively. They are working very diligently, and that generates a whole bunch of
excitement and interest from people who aren't ordinarily
accessing these services.
Absolutely.
That's why it's important for us to make sure that, no different
under Whānau Ora one point zero, but very important given the resources
that are allocated, that other agencies who are responsible for delivering
services don't just offload Whānau-
Sure
... onto Whānau Ora and onto Whānau Ora provision.
Mm-hmm.
Now, what we do know, and what I've said earlier, is we've got more navigators
now. That's good. That's a good thing.
What we have to make sure is that those navigators are given the training and
workforce development support to make sure that they are effective.
Okay, that's cool. But you can be a victim of your success as well
when you're in this space. So it's making sure
that we do
deliver Whānau Ora services in a incredible manner,
that we build up that evidence base, that we show
not just Whānau, ultimately who are the recipients of these services, but
also our colleagues, peers, and others across the public sector,
that the Whānau commissioning model is a successful one.
And it's evidenced. It's not just bulk funded and then we get
no information uploaded on the IDI, and then it's back to
finger sucking and pointing to the wind.
Finger sucking and pointing your finger to the wind.
Which is not my way of doing things.
Mr. Subtituli.
So basically it's telling us today that
Whānau Ora that came in in 2014
had been a failure for 11 years until you came along.
That's what you're saying today, right?
You and your team have constantly
rubbished
the work that has been done before,
and
I keep hearing from you that there was no evidence coming forward.
But now it's all under your
watch, it's all sort of come right.
Can't quite work this out when we've worked out that there's less money now
and Whānau Ora
obligations are being farmed out to mainstream.
How all of a sudden did you become so successful and
everyone else has failed over the last 11 years?
It's amazing, Mr. Chair. The member seems to be on a different conversation
tonight.
100%.
As you're aware, as the committee and committee members-
Your team have constantly-
Whānau Ora was started by a
National-led government in collaboration with Tariana
Turia and others. That's how it was started, just a reminder to all the committee
members. But it wasn't necessarily perfect either.
There were some shortcomings, and it was not
procured over 10 years. And so we went through a process,
a procurement process, a very defensible one, and it was
endorsed by Audit NZ and others, and we reached a different
situation for Whānau Ora two point zero.
The overarching and underlying outcomes, the seven outcomes of Whānau Ora
preserved, but we've got a better way of evidencing
and credentializing the awesome work that Whānau Ora providers and commissioning
agencies do. I've never said that Whānau Ora one point zero was
a failure and now it's a success because of me. Not at all.
No, you as CEO-
What I'm saying is that-
Constantly-
Referring to the-
Mr. Subtituli
... to the previous commission as not having provided
enough evidence. It's been constant through
this session.
It was not pushed through the IDI, and as a result, the public sector was not able
to understand that in a way that provided a more powerful argument
for further support, for further funding, for further investment in
Whānau Ora. Now we've got the social investment
intersection with the Whānau Ora aspiration.
We have tilted and we've checked
the Whānau Ora portfolio in order to make sure that
not only are we aligned to, not the same as, but aligned to social
investment, but it is fit for purpose for the future.
And we can't say that the member in
is not as good as the member he is in 2026.
I think the member is a better person in 2026 compared to 2014.
No, but you're saying-
But that's because you've made changes.
No, but you're saying, can I just say, Dave, your rhetoric
surprises me because the previous commission we saw
had international acclaim, was peer reviewed
by our government. Winston
Peters asked for a peer review when we became government in
2017 and passed all tests. But you constantly talk
about the previous commission not providing
evidence. I'm not sure where you're getting your evidence.
No, the previous commissioning agencies did not upload data
on a de-identified basis into the IDI that can then be used to
understand
how effective the delivery of services are from a public sector perspective.
Anecdotally, sure, fine. But from a public sector
perspective, it didn't necessarily pass the muster that we have in 2025,
2026.
You can do more you like, but Winston Peters
asked for these reports to be done
when we became government. You know this, Dave.
This sounds like a bid for a coalition arrangement. Anyway.
Look, can I just clarify what I said?
And it's that across the whole of the programs that the public
service funds was identified we cannot prove
attribution.
Mm.
All of the programs, not just Whānau Ora, all of them.
And there was an opportunity,
and the opportunity for Whanau Ora was to get Whanau Ora ahead of the
game,
and to be able to put the data into the IDI.
Because in my view, okay, if that is
the
baseline that we're operating on, that no one
across the public service can prove attribution, we can only prove correlation,
well, the best way to ensure that the Whanau Ora
kaupapa and the value of Whanau Ora is put ahead of everybody
else and at the front of the crew-- uh, the queue,
is to prove attribution. And they are now doing that.
Mm.
They're on the road. It was not
me pointing a finger at the previous commissioning agencies.
It was about all of the programs across the public service.
Yeah. Absolutely.
But
can I follow up on that, Mr. Chair? Because while we're
seeing Whanau Ora being taken ahead, we're trying to
prove the attribution and report better, the dollar for
admin, data analysis, all of that funding there is so
small-
True
... in order to overprove how effective we are.
It's ridiculous.
What does that look like on the ground?
Because I keep thinking about a stressed workforce as it is, and the back
office function is so lean. Is it really
fair to Whanau Ora commissioning agencies when the
dollar is so small compared to the delivery outputs that are
required?
That's right.
I think you make a reasonable
observation there, Huhana, because I too have been a little bit concerned
with the level of compliance, like factor compliance, that commission
agencies and providers have to go through in order to demonstrate that, "Oh, we're
being good citizens."
Mm.
You know, good recipients of public service funding.
The Māori have become-
So I think that that is-
That's right. That's right
... fair. Now, we talked about this last year, as you might recall.
And what I asked the team to do is to be very careful around
the level of compliance, and if needed,
we may be able to just
pull back a bit on all the compliance requirements, which gives people a bit of
breathing space. But I don't think that there's been any
serious red flags so far across the agencies
and the providers to say, "There's no way we can do this because we're getting too
consumed by the compliance elements." Because the last thing we want to do is put
more and more brown tape on our providers. That's not cool.
Mm.
But,
Grace.
Yes, just to add to that, Minister, so over this first 12 months,
so we're now in month 12 of delivery-
Yeah. That's right
... under the new contracts, as I said earlier, we've been working closely with the
four commissioning agencies, including our staff, literally working in their
offices, helping them with the data collection and so on.
Because this is a new way of working.
Mm.
So we are really conscious that we are embedding some shifts and some different
approaches.
Mm.
We're also conscious that that FTE model is a complete departure from Whanau
Ora 2.0. And I will say just to the
members' earlier question, the previous commissioning agencies
did everything we asked them to do.
So the fact that we weren't pulling data into the IDI, that was never a contractual
requirement.
Mm.
That is why we went out and reprocured a new shift.
And it's a requirement now.
And now it is a requirement.
It is a requirement.
IDI is a requirement.
That's right.
Yes.
Now, going forward, some of the feedback we've had from commissioning agencies has
been, well, the FTE model may be a bit
cumbersome, and yes, it's transparent and so on.
As the data results appear, as we get the
evidence coming through that the Whanau Ora model works, that the reach is
there, that the impact is there, and so on, that actually there is the
possibility of moving back to greater bulk funding approaches.
Sure.
We don't have that strong evidential base that we need in
order to make the strong case for that yet.
I can tell you,
Whanau Ora navigators are doing an amazing
power of work in community, but what I am still
concerned about is the compliance and the focus that they
have-
That's right
... in terms of us being the Māori-
... having to prove ourselves so much more.
That's right.
And yet other parts of the sector don't have that level of
scrutiny.
Mm.
So I celebrate what Whanau Ora continues to do in these
providers and the frontline focus, but also how do we lift
our gaze and have that same level of compliance and accountability
across the public sector?
That's right. Yeah.
So, Whanau Ora is paving the way for new
accountability.
Yeah.
But also how do we resource them to tell their story-
Yeah
... above and beyond just compliance?
Well, I think, I understand that that's a reasonable observation, but
it should be channeled through other select committees or maybe an OPQ in
the house.
Mm.
We've set out the procurement and been pretty deliberate about that because we do
want Whanau Ora to be a flagship in terms of evidence base to
go from wherever it was, level one or two, up to level three, and be
enduring in that space. We have some
flexibility to be a little bit more accommodating around some of the tape or the
compliance which you've referred to.
Mm.
And I do think that when you scrub it all down,
many of the navigators are out-performers around the delivery or the
facilitation of public services.
And they don't have to just be GI Tama, GI Huhana,
but also have to be able to knock up a house and fix up a marae and sort
out-
Yeah, mentors
... a couple of motor homes-
Yeah
... to get to Ngāi Tūhoe as well. And that's Te Rau Pupū and others who are
doing a marvelous job.
Mm.
Actually,
I'll just acknowledge Lenny and that other Whanaungaravio guys that passed away,
the secretary at Ngāti Bene.
Mm.
So I'll just acknowledge them as well.
Mm-hmm.
So I do think that the navigators out there are
very dexterous
and very,
what's the word?
They're like decathletes in the space.
Mm.
They're having to do everything.
Yes.
Okay, I'm going to take the last supplement of this area before we go to a new line
of questioning with Oriini. So Greg.
Oh, yeah. Kia ora. Just trying to get clear on the numbers.
So there's been some conjecture around the fact there's been cuts there.
There haven't been, so the purchasing of Whanau Ora has had
a very slight increase, $100,000.
So obviously there's been the six to seven percent reduction, as we've seen across
the public service in terms of the back office activity.
So that's 700,000. You still got nearly $9 million
for
implementing, developing, administering, and evaluating.
But in addition, you're saying you've got, is it, I think the numbers you said 300
navigators.
Yeah.
25,000 a piece, that's another seven and a half million.
That's for Angitama, though. That's for region one.
Right. Just for that one. Yeah. So there's actually considerable resources in
terms of supporting-
Resources
... now, this is, well, I'm looking at the Attorney General's report.
I've reasonable confidence in that.
Well, there's over 700 navigators.
That's right.
301, I think it is, in region one.
Yeah.
The navigators, or the commission agencies are funded on a navigator basis
ultimately,
at 150K, 25 of which goes to the back office and the
admin.
Yeah.
What Huhana was saying is fair. There's a lot of compliance expectation on
navigators and providers and the commission agencies.
And right, is there enough money
to do everything that we want to do? No.
Is there enough money to do some things really, really well? Yes.
Mm-hmm.
Can we do better?
Absolutely. But are we setting up the systems in a manner that it's
enduring and fit for purpose over time? Absolutely.
Mm-hmm.
And we can prove it.
Yeah.
That's the point here.
If no one else can prove it, and we can prove it-
Yeah
... that puts us in a good position.
And that's why I'm so enthused that Strengthening Families within Oranga Tamariki
has started to move some of their resource through the Whanau Ora commission and
arrangements. And I expect over time, and hope over time, more
agencies will see the value in this commissioning model because in our
view, it will be more credible than a whole bunch of the public sector.
Okay, we're going to go to a new line of questions, so Oriini.
It's still kind of in alignment, but
it's to do with the appropriations, Minister.
And
clearly the decrease this time round for '26, '27 is
0.714 million. When we break that down even
further, there's two reduction areas, and I really want to ask about
actually the second one. $50,000 being reduced for the Nātini
Whetū extension program to provide targeted support
to our māmā hapū, to our pregnant mums and new
families. First question is why reduce that
area, and is it just a one-off
adjustment, or does it signal a
longer-term change in how support for our māmā who are hapū and their
whānau in the first 1,000 days,
and how that will be funded?
Just FYI on Nātini Whetū, that program has effectively been
terminated but superseded by the Hutia Te Rito program, which has been run out of
Angitama and Mahutonga. At a broader context, there
have been a raft of first 1,000 and 2,000 day
programs across the public service.
Nātini Whetū had some very solid outcomes, and we expect
Hutia Te Rito to have even more credentialized and evidence-based
outcomes. So I wouldn't say that the Hutia has gone completely.
It's just been re-
Aligned. Yeah, yeah
... aligned with the Hutia Te Rito
product. But that's not just a lift and shift either of
Nātini Whetū into Hutia Te Rito. There will be some
changes, but there will be some continuity of support to whānau that are
in that program. Oh, yes. Go on. Introduce yourself.
Kia ora, I'm Steven, CFO Te Puni Kōkiri.
The funding you're talking about is departmental funding, so that's for Te Puni
Kōkiri to monitor what was Nātini Whetū.
The phasing of that funding was 120,000 in this financial
year, dropping to 70,000-
Yeah
... next financial year.
But that's internally at TPK, not outwards to navigators themselves.
So it's departmental.
It's departmental.
But in effect, because we are going through the new
commissioning agencies of Angitama and Mahutonga, we're able
to streamline the ability to be able to provision
for those services through this new service.
And the additional thing that we're able to do is,
those services will be looking for the information to go into the IBI.
So that will mean that
what we learn through Hutia Te Rito there'll be
a
greater evidence base to be able to draw on the effectiveness for
māmā and babies and whānau.
You all right? Okay, Willie.
I just wonder, because I know we're coming towards the end.
I am really alarmed, Minister,
not with the effort, and I acknowledge the effort from you and
TPK. In all sincerity, I do acknowledge the effort.
But I'm really alarmed at the line that
we have to constantly prove ourselves.
I find it actually fundamentally racist that
our organizations and our groups have to constantly do this,
Dave, when we know that Māori money is in
mainstream departments.
Nobody has to prove themselves there in terms of Māori being delivered on, in
terms of the Māori dollar. This is not the only
Māori money in terms of Whanau Ora. We know this.
Māori money goes right across all the mainstream agencies.
No one has to prove a thing.
Only us. Only TPK and this
minister.
Final question.
And the question is, do you think that, Minister, that that's wrong
in terms of this because your...
And I recognize you're fighting for Whanau Ora. I don't want to be smarty.
I recognize you're fighting for Whanau Ora, but it just seems principally
wrong that the department and Whanau
Ora has to keep doing this after 12 years in
existence.
Okay.
I think that that energy and enthusiasm you have is
respected, and you should hold those departments and ministries and
agencies to account to ensure that all our agencies and
social
services and social investment up their game to demonstrate the
evidence requirements and attribution requirements
that this government has
set out and articulated. That's the first thing.
The second thing is that
whilst I don't necessarily
accede or agree with the way you've postulated
around prejudice and racists, what I would say is,
I come from a background where I don't kill people with kindness.
I torture them with success.
That's the background I come from.
You might come from a different background, and I respect that.
The final thing I'll say is this:
Yeah, I'll ask a supp of that.
Yep.
Because
for all of the talk of data today, quality data,
except that
what evidence is there in this budget that that
data has informed a different or better
outcome pertaining to this budget that's in front of
us today?
I'll be very cautious about using the
budget in order to respond to that question.
We're in appropriations.
Yeah. Well, we are in appropriations, but it's at the operational end-
Where is the data evidenced in the appropriations?
It's at the operational end, which I've heard from Grace today about, where we are
demonstrably changing up and moving gear
around credentializing the attribution of public
appropriations and public money to results.
Now, again,
the member, Willie Jackson, has a different view around how
we should be treating public monies. And that's fine. It's his view.
What we're saying is, actually, the Minister of Finance and Minister for Social
Investment absolutely supports Whanau Ora, and that's why we've got $179
million baseline dedicated to this cause.
And my expectation is that this team behind me are doing a
sterling job in trying to get the Whanau Ora 2.0 waka on
the water and with ballast alongside providers and commission
agencies,
will do and continue to do a great job.
But has any of that data informed the decisions
around this budget, Minister?
We went through a procurement process in 2025, as you're well aware of.
We've procured new commission agencies, and now we're using
the data in a way to demonstrate attribution.
The data that came forward from the October to-
From July to October
... July to October basically ran into the same
time as budget preparation. I expect that further data feeds-
So, no
... will better inform. Well, we've only just got started.
So you can't just start a race in the first 100 meters of a mile race
and say, "This is the time this person's going to finish in."
No, but my question was simple. Did it inform
the budget appropriations that we're discussing today?
The data feeds. When did those data feeds and the analysis come through?
I think April.
In April. And as you know, or you don't because you haven't been in government
recently, the budget is prepared in March and April.
So, no.
Well, how can it be? It wasn't available.
It wasn't there.
Yeah.
Right. We are very close to time. In fact, I think we are
basically on time where we are. I very much
appreciate you, Minister-
Thank you
... and Gabe and your team as well for coming before us today with this very
important subject, this Kaikoako Whanau Ora.
Very important subject.
And it's
good to hear some of the new initiatives and the progress that's been made.
So thank you very much-
Thank you for your time
... for your attendance, and we'll catch you again here.
No, mate. Thank you.
Thank you.